उपयातानां सुदृशां कुसुमायुधबाणपातविवशानाम् ।
अभिवाञ्छितं विधातुं कृतमतिरपि ता जगाथ वाममिव ॥१॥
उपयातानां	who had come
सुदृशां	the beautiful women
कुसुमायुध-	(whom) Cupid's
बाण-पात-	arrows strike
विवशानाम्	(had made) helpless
अभिवाञ्छितं	desire
विधातुं	to fulfil
कृतमति:-अपि	having decided though
ता: जगाथ	to them spoke
वामम्-इव	unfavourable like
Thou had decided to fulfil the desire of the beautiful women who had come to Thee. They were helpless as they were struck by Cupid's arrow for Thee. Yet Thou first spoke to them in an unfavourable manner.
गगनगतं मुनिनिवहं श्रावयितुं जगिथ कुलवधूधर्मम् ।
धर्म्यं खलु ते वचनं कर्म तु नो निर्मलस्य विश्वास्यम् ॥२॥
गगन-गतं	waiting in the skies
मुनि-निवहं	the host of sages
श्रावयितुं	to make them hear
जगिथ	(Thou) stated
कुल-वधू-धर्मम्	the housewives' duties
धर्म्यम् खलु	in accordance of Dharma indeed
ते वचनं	Thy words
कर्म तु नो	actions but not
निर्मलस्य	of Thee who are pure
विश्वास्यम्	(are) to be followed
To the hearing of the sages assembled in the skies, Thou stated the duties of the housewives, for the benefit of the world. Indeed, Thy words are to be followed for they are in accordance with the Dharma. But the actions of Thee who are ever pure, should not be practiced by others, because Thy actions do not always conform to the good and bad standards of the world.
आकर्ण्य ते प्रतीपां वाणीमेणीदृश: परं दीना: ।
मा मा करुणासिन्धो परित्यजेत्यतिचिरं विलेपुस्ता: ॥३॥
आकर्ण्य ते	hearing Thy
प्रतीपां वाणीम्-	unfavourable speech
एणीदृश:	the doe eyed damsels
परं दीना:	very much grief stricken
मा मा	do not O do not
करुणासिन्धो	O Thou ocean of compassion
परित्यज-इति-	forsake thus
अचिरं	for long
विलेपु:-ता:	pleaded they
On hearing Thy unfavourable speech, those doe eyed women were very much grief stricken. For long did they plead saying 'O Thou ocean of compassion, do not, O do not forsake us.'
तासां रुदितैर्लपितै: करुणाकुलमानसो मुरारे त्वम् ।
ताभिस्समं प्रवृत्तो यमुनापुलिनेषु काममभिरन्तुम् ॥४॥
तासां रुदितै:-	by their weeping
लपितै:	(and) pleading
करुणा-आकुल-	with pity moved
मानस:	Thy mind
मुरारे त्वम्	O Slayer of Mur! Thou
ताभि:-समम्	with them
प्रवृत्त:	set out
यमुना-पुलिनेषु	on the Yamunaa sand banks
कामम्-अभिरन्तुम्	desiring to sport freely
O Thou! Slayer of Mura! Moved with pity by their weeping and pleading, Thou set out to sport freely with them on the sand banks of Yamunaa river.
चन्द्रकरस्यन्दलसत्सुन्दरयमुनातटान्तवीथीषु ।
गोपीजनोत्तरीयैरापादितसंस्तरो न्यषीदस्त्वम् ॥५॥
चन्द्रकर-	the moon light
स्यन्द-लसत्-	flowing and shining
सुन्दर-	beautifully
यमुना-तटान्त-	on the Yamunaa banks
वीथीषु	and the sand banks
गोपीजन-	the Gopikaas
उत्तरीयै:-	(by their) upper garment
आपादित-संस्तर:	spread out bed
न्यषीद:-त्वम्	sat down Thou
The sand banks of Yamunaa was lit by beautifully flowing and shining moon light. There Thou sat down on the bed which was made by the Gopikaas by spreading out their upper garment.
सुमधुरनर्मालपनै: करसंग्रहणैश्च चुम्बनोल्लासै: ।
गाढालिङ्गनसङ्गैस्त्वमङ्गनालोकमाकुलीचकृषे ॥६॥
सुमधुर्-	(with) sweet
नर्म-आलपनै:	playful talks
कर-संग्रहणै:-च	and by hands holding
चुम्बन-उल्लासै:	and by the joy of kisses
गाढ-आलिङ्गन-सङ्गै:-	and by close hearty embraces
त्वम्-	Thou
अङ्गना-लोकम्-	the women folk
आकुली-चकृषे	delighted immensely
By Thy sweet and playful talks, by holding of hands, by the joy of kisses, and by close hearty embraces, Thou delighted the women folk immensely.
वासोहरणदिने यद्वासोहरणं प्रतिश्रुतं तासाम् ।
तदपि विभो रसविवशस्वान्तानां कान्त सुभ्रुवामदधा: ॥७॥
वासो-हरण-दिने	on the day when the clothes were stolen
यत्-वासो-हरणम्	that stealing of clothes
प्रतिश्रुतं तासाम्	was promised to them (to the gopis)
तत्-अपि विभो	that also O Lord!
रस-विवश-स्वान्तानां	to bliss overcome minds
कान्त	O Charming One!
सुभ्रुवाम्-	(to them) the beautiful eyed ones
अदधा:	Thou gave (the promise)
On the day of the stealing of clothes, O Lord! Thou had promised to them the stealing of clothes (the removal of the sense of ego). That also, O charming One! Thou gave to the beautiful eyed women, whose minds were overcome with bliss.
कन्दलितघर्मलेशं कुन्दमृदुस्मेरवक्त्रपाथोजम् ।
नन्दसुत त्वां त्रिजगत्सुन्दरमुपगूह्य नन्दिता बाला: ॥८॥
कन्दलित-	sprouting of
घर्म-लेशं	perspiration drops(and with)
कुन्द-मृदु-स्मेर-	jasmine like soft smile
वक्त्र-पाथोजम्	and face like a lotus
नन्दसुत त्वां	O Thee the son of Nanda
त्रिजगत्-सुन्दरम्-	the most resplendent one in the worlds
उपगूह्य	embracing
नन्दिता: बाला:	were very delighted, the damsels
O Son of Nanda! The most resplendent one in the three worlds! Perspiration drops sprouted on Thy body. Thy lotus face was soft with a jasmine like smile. The damsels embracing Thee were very delighted.
विरहेष्वङ्गारमय: शृङ्गारमयश्च सङ्गमे हि त्वम् नितरामङ्गारमयस्तत्र पुनस्सङ्गमेऽपि चित्रमिदम् ॥९॥
विरहेषु-	in separation
अङ्गारमय:	(Thou) are like burning charcoal
शृङ्गारमय:-च	(and) love embodied
सङ्गमे	in union
हि त्वम्	indeed are Thou
नितराम्-	absolutely
अङ्ग-अरमय:	O Dear One! (Thou) gave delight
तत्र पुन:-	there again
सङ्गमे-अपि	in union also
चित्रम्-इदम्	wonderful it is
In separation with Thee, Thou are unbearable as a burning charcoal. In union indeed Thou are an absolute embodiment of love. O Dear One! Wonderful it indeed is that in union also, here again the women were delighted.
राधातुङ्गपयोधरसाधुपरीरम्भलोलुपात्मानम् ।
आराधये भवन्तं पवनपुराधीश शमय सकलगदान् ॥१०॥
राधा-तुङ्ग-पयोधर-	Raadhaa's bulging breasts
साधु-परीरम्भ-	nicely (to) embrace
लोलुप-आत्मानम्	eager with a mind
आराधये भवन्तं	(I) worship Thee
पवनपुराधीश	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
शमय सकल-गदान्	eradicate all the ailments.
O Lord of Guruvaayur! I worship Thee who are eager in mind to nicely embrace the bulging breasts of Raadhaa. I pray to Thee to eradicate all the ailments.